Supplementary Note 9. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations

Polymerization simulation methods. Monomer molecular models were  constructed and

described  using  the  general AMBER  force  field12.  1050 TMC  molecules  and  1575

ODA/6FODA/PFMB molecules were packed in a cubic cell of size 100 Å with a low density of

0.4 g cm−3. The chlorines in TMC molecules and the amino hydrogens in ODA/6FODA/PFMB

molecules  were  removed.  Carbons  of  carbonyls  in TMC  molecules  and  nitrogens  in

ODA/6FODA/PFMB molecules were marked with a tag, and then the polymerization steps were

performed between the tagged carbons and nitrogens within a cut-off of 6 Å, using energy

minimization and molecular dynamics (MD) steps to adjust the molecules. Unreacted carbonyls

and amine ends were restored to chlorines and hydrogens. GROMACS 2023.2 was used in the MD

steps for both polymerization and equilibrium13. Zeo++ was used to analyze fractional free volume

and accessible surface, with a probe radius of 0.6, 1.0, and 1.8 Å, respectively. Zeo++ was used to

analyze voids, pore size distribution, and surface area14.

MD Parameters. All all-atom MD simulations were based on a general AMBER force field with

RESP charges and were conducted using the Gromacs-2023.2 software package. The system was

a relaxed liquid configuration at 298 K. The total run time for the equilibrium MD simulation was

50 ns NPT. We used the relaxed system as a starting configuration. As  it is prior to system

relaxation MD, energy minimization was carried out with a composite protocol of steepest descent

using termination gradients of 100 kJ mol−1 nm−1. The equilibrium temperature was maintained at

298 K using a Nose´-Hoover thermostat, and periodic boundary conditions were imposed on all

three dimensions15. The Particle Mesh-Ewald method was used to compute the long-range

electrostatics within a relative tolerance of 1×10–6 16. A cut-off distance of 1nm was applied to real-

space Ewald interactions. The same value was used for van der Waals interactions. The LINCS

algorithm was applied to constrain the bond lengths of hydrogen atoms17. A leap-frog algorithm

was used with a time step of 2 fs18.




                                                  13