Supplementary Note 8. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations

DFT calculations were performed with the ORCA quantum chemistry software version 5.0.44. The

B3LYP functional was adopted for the calculations in tandem with the D3BJ dispersion correction5,

6. Geometry optimization and single-point calculations were performed using the def2-SVP and

def2-TZVP basis sets, respectively, following the AutoAux generation procedure7. Conformation

searches were performed using the gfn2-xtb method in the xtb software. The 100 conformations

obtained were optimized and their energies were calculated. Structures with similar energies

(energy threshold = 1 kcal mol−1) and similar structures (geometry threshold = 1 Å) were identified

as the same structure. Typical polyamide molecular fragments of 6FODA-M, ODA-M, and PFMB-

M were constructed, and the single-point energies were calculated after geometry optimization.

The binding conformations of different solvent molecules (methanol, acetone, and hexane) with

polyamide fragments were subsequently optimized, and the calculated single-point energies were

converted to binding energies. Specifically, the binding energy was calculated as EB = Etotal – EPA

– Esol, where Etotal represents the total energy of polyamide fragments with the solvent molecules,

EPA is the energy of polyamide fragments, and Esol refers to the energy of solvent molecules.

Moreover, the adsorption energies (ΔEads) were calculated as ΔEads = Etotal – Esub – Ehexane, where

Etotal is the total energy of hexane adsorbed on the representative polyamide fragments, Esub is the

total energy of polyamide fragments, and Ehexane is the energy of adsorbed hexane. The energy

required for hexane to desorb from the surface of the polyamide fragments could be calculated as

ΔEdes = Es – Eu, where ΔEdes is the desorption energy, Es is the total energy of hexane on polyamide

fragments, and Eu is the total energy of hexane at an infinite distance. The distribution of

electrostatic potential (ESP), average local ionization energy (ALIE), local electron attachment

energy (LEAE), Fukui function, nucleophilicity index, and energy levels of the highest occupied

molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the monomer

were analyzed using the Multiwfn software package8, 9. Subsequently, the RESP and EEM charges

of the structure were analyzed using the Multiwfn software package, and the electrostatic potential


                                                  10