B. Oudini et al.                                                                                                                    Journal of Molecular Structure 1354 (2026) 144830

on the thiazoline ring, show no significant antioxidant activity.              structures, molecular electrostatic potential (MEP) surfaces were plotted
   These observations are consistent with the existing literature [60]    from the optimized structures of the selected compounds at the same
and our previous research [62]. The IC50 values (µM) of the compounds     level of theory, giving information about electron acceptor and electron
followed the order: 4d > 4b > 4 g > 4h > 4i > 4j > ascorbic acid > 4c.    donor regions. The different values of the electrostatic potential at the
Consequently, compound 4c demonstrates remarkable DPPH radical     surface are represented by different colors[64] in the following order
scavenging capacity, highlighting its potential as an antioxidant.          blue>green>yellow> orange>red. MEPs are very important in the
                                                                           prediction of reactive sites for electrophilic and nucleophilic attacks on a
3.6. Chemical descriptors                                              molecule together with hydrogen bonding interactions [65].
                                                    MEP was calculated for the most active antioxidant compounds 4c
   The reactivity of a molecule can also be characterized by its quantum    (IC50=11.96μ M) and the least 4d (IC50=763.61 μM) (Fig. 10). For the
indicators, such as electron affinity (χ), chemical hardness (η), chemical    compound 4c, the negative values (red) are mainly located over the
softness (σ), chemical potential (μ), and electrophilicity index (ω), which    oxygen atom COOH  , the sulfur atom and the ketone groups of the
are derived from the energies of the Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital    rhodanine moiety, indicating a potential electrophilic attack site, while
(HOMO) and the Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (LUMO). The     the most positive regions are localized in the thiazole ring and on the
chemical hardness (η) and softness (σ) help estimate the stability and     carboxylic acid hydrogen(-CO2H). On the other hand, the electrophilic
reactivity of the entity, and define the molecule’s ability to resist     regions of compound 4d are only observed on the ketone oxygen and
changes in its electron density distribution [63]. The electronegativity     sulfur atom of the rhodanine ring, while the sites of electron density
(χ) quantifies a molecule’s capacity to attract electrons, while the     deficiency (blue) are distributed mainly over the entire thiazole ring.
chemical potential (μ) reflects its tendency to donate electrons. Addi­    The main difference between the two compounds lies in the carboxylic
tionally, the electrophilicity index (ω) indicates the ability of a species to     acid, and therefore this additional reactive site is the most likely to
accept electrons.                                                             rationalize the increased antioxidant activity.
   For all compounds, the HOMO and LUMO adopt similar geometry
(Fig. 8): both are distributed over the thiazole-rhodanine core, and do     3.8. Hirshfeld surface analyses
not spread over the nitrogen substituents. The HOMO-LUMO energy
values and some chemical parameters were calculated for the most        Hirshfeld surface analysis helps to understand molecular interactions
active antioxidant compounds 4c, 4h, 4i, 4j and less actives 4b and 4d,    and design molecules with targeted properties by studying their non-
from their optimization geometry using DFT/ B3LYP/6–311G+(d, p)     covalent bonds. Three-dimensional Hirshfeld surfaces and the corre­
levels to compare their reactivity. As illustrated in Table 2, the higher    sponding two-dimensional fingerprint maps were generated using the
hardness (1.784–1.789 eV) and lower softness (0.558–0.560 eV) of     CrystalExplorer21.5 program [66]. The results give some insights into
compounds 4b, 4c and 4d illustrate their lower intramolecular charge     the nature and strength of the intermolecular interactions (Fig. 11). The
transfer. In addition, compounds 4b, 4c and 4d have the highest ΔE     distribution of individual intermolecular interactions in compound 4b
among all selected compounds indicating their kinetic stability, whereas     reveals the nature and strength of these interactions. For compound 4b,
4h has the lowest ΔE displaying its kinetic reactivity.                    a  significant  majority  of  the  intermolecular  interactions  are
  A large and similar value of ΔE (ELUMO-EHOMO)  is observed for     hydrogen-based,  specifically H⋅⋅⋅H (60.9 %), H⋅⋅⋅S/S⋅⋅⋅H (34.8 %),
compounds 4b (3.569 eV) and 4d (3.579 eV), confirming their high     H⋅⋅⋅O/O⋅⋅⋅H (3.4 %) and H⋅⋅⋅C/C⋅⋅⋅H (0.7 %), suggesting a pivotal role of
stability and less activity compared to the compounds 4h (3.413 eV), 4i    hydrogen bonding and van der Waals forces in its structural stability.
(3.427 eV) and 4j (3.427 eV). We noted that the presence of electron    The symmetrical fingerprint plots further corroborate that these in­
donating substituent (OCH3) on the thiazole ring destabilized the LUMO     teractions mainly occur between identical monomers, with H⋅⋅⋅H con­
orbital and decreased the energy gap ΔE. Therefore, 4h could be     tacts dominating due to the minimal van der Waals radius of hydrogen.
considered more reactive and less stable than the other selected com­
pounds. The relationship between the calculated ΔE values of these     4. Conclusion
compounds is 4d (3.579 eV)> 4b (3.569 eV)> 4j (3.427 eV) > 4h (3.413
eV). This order is in good agreement with their ELUMO energies: 4d        In this study, the synthesis of twelve rhodanine derivatives is re­
(ELUMO = −1.720 eV) >4b (ELUMO = −1.750 eV) > 4j (ELUMO = −1.876     ported, along with their in vitro antioxidant activity and their photo­
eV) >4h (ELUMO = −1.904 eV). Indeed, compound 4d showed the     physical properties. The structures of the compounds were confirmed
highest chemical hardness value (ɳ= 1.789 eV) and the lowest softness    through NMR studies, FTIR and UV-visible, which were in accordance
(ơ= 0.558 eV) which indicates a lower intramolecular charge transfer.    with the predictions obtained through DFT calculations. Additionally,
On the other hand, the antioxidant properties are often related to the     the HOMO-LUMO energies and some quantum chemical parameters of
energy of the LUMO, as a lower LUMO energy means that the compound     selected compounds were calculated, to rationalize their antioxidant
is more capable to accepting electrons. The energies of the HOMO and      activity. Among the synthesized compounds, 4c exhibited the highest
LUMO are influenced by the presence of substituents on the thiazole and     antioxidant activity measured through DPPH assays (IC50 = 11.96 μM),
rhodamine rings. These observations are in agreement with the experi­     similar to the reference standard ascorbic acid (IC50 = 13.71 μM).
mental antioxidant activities (Fig. 9).                                         Interestingly, the compounds lacking an acidic functional group and
   In order  to compare compounds 4c (IC50=11.96 μM) and 4i     those possessing electron-donating group on the rhodamine (4‑methoxy
(IC50=25.89 μM), both containing a carboxylic acid, the energies of their     phenyl) exhibited no significant activity towards DPPH. On the other
HOMO and LUMO, as well as their gap ΔE, can be compared. Table 2     hand, analogues containing a conjugated aromatic ring and a free acid
indicates that 4c has the same ΔE, chemical hardness and softness as     function displayed marked antioxidant activity. Molecular electrostatic
compound 4d, while 4i has the same ΔE, chemical hardness and softness     potential (MEP) maps were utilized to identify reactive sites in both the
as compound 4j. It appears that 4c should be more stable and should    most active compound 4c and the less active compound 4d, confirming
display lower intramolecular charge transfer than 4i, but they should     the correlation with the experimental results. Additionally,  all the
present the same acidity. Therefore, it seems that these chemical de­    compounds exhibit detectable fluorescence around 500 nm with a low
scriptors fail to rationalize the antioxidant activity of these compounds.    quantum yield, indicating that their localization inside cells or tissues
                                                                     could be tracked by fluorescence microscopy. Merging rhodanine and
3.7. Molecular electrostatic potential (MEP)                                  thiazole proved a successful strategy to access antioxidant-fluorescent
                                                                       dyads. This combination of properties suggests potential applications
   In order to predict the distribution of the electronic charge over all     in biological and analytical contexts, particularly for the monitorization

                                                                        9