Journal of Natural Products                                        pubs.acs.org/jnp                                                 Article

                                                                         Overall, this study reports for the first time the development
                                                                      of a photobiocatalytic cascade  for the  synthesis  of highly
                                                                    valuable α-branched THPs starting from the natural product
                                                                              citronellol. The successful combination of both steps of the
                                                                    cascade, namely, the photocatalytic Schenk-ene reaction and
                                                                 the enzymatic  haloetherification  in a one-pot  fashion, was
                                                                        successfully demonstrated.
                                                                                         It is noteworthy that the biocatalytic cyclization proceeded
                                                               with high regioselectivity, exclusively affording 6-membered
                                                                            rings.  Experimental and  computational  studies aimed  at
                                                                      elucidating the observed selectivity pointed to the key role of
                                                                 a polarizing hydroperoxide group close to the reactive C−C
                                                             double bond. Additional experiments concerning the possible
                                                                     influence  of  the Thorpe−Ingold bond compression  effect
                                                                   exerted by the geminal dimethyl moiety of citronellol on the
                                                                           regioselectivity of the haloetherification will be the focus of
                                                                      future studies.
                                                                 Furthermore, the use of (R)- and (S)-citronellol as starting
                                                                      materials enabled the stereocontrolled formation and isolation
                                                                      of separated diastereomeric compounds, each bearing three
                                                                         fixed stereocenters, including an easily modifiable exocyclic
                                                              halogen atom  adjacent  to the THP  ring. The developedFigure 4. Molecular electrostatic potential (MEP) maps, in atomic
units, for (R)-4 (representative enantiomer) and 7. In the color scale      cascade could be the starting point for the synthesis of the four
shown, red regions correspond to areas of higher electron density      stereoisomers of the natural product rose oxide (Figures 1 and
(more negative potential), while blue regions indicate lower electron       2a,b),  fragrance  contained  in  the  essential  oil  of  Melissa
density (more positive potential).                                                officinalis l.,30 in enantiopure form and by an eco-sustainable
                                                                      process.
                                                                Future studies will be directed toward the application of thepurification of the crude product allowed the recovery of THP
                                                                novel  one-pot-two-step  photobiocatalytic  cascade  to  other5 with a 47% yield over two steps.
                                                                         substrates.   Finally, the scope of the reaction was extended to optically
pure  (S)-1 and (R)-1  citronellol. The 6-membered  ring
products (S,R,S)-5, (R,R,R)-5, (S,S,S)-5, and (R,S,R)-5 were                    SECTIONselectively obtained, the antiregioselectivity in the bromira-    ■EXPERIMENTAL
                                                               Materials
nium-ion-based halocyclization yielding only a single pair of
possible diastereoisomers (Scheme 4). Careful optimization of      Commercially  available  reagents  were  used  without  further
the purification procedure allowed for a successful separation        purification. Reaction was monitored using thin-layer chromatography
of the four THP products in enantiopure form (see details in     on  precoated aluminum  silica  gel Merck 60 F254  plates. The
                                                                          detection occurred via fluorescence quenching or development in aExperimental Section). With respect to previously published
                                                                  molybdate phosphate solution (10% in EtOH). Merck silica gel 60procedures reported in Figure 2c13,d14, the one-pot-two-step                                                           (230−400 mesh) was used for chromatography applying the indicated
cascade affords the haloetherification in comparable yield and      mobile phase. The product was dried under high vacuum (10−3
under  significantly more  sustainable conditions,  giving the      mbar) before characterization. 1H NMR and 13C NMR were recorded
product with higher enantiopurity compared to the quinone     on a Bruker Avance DRX400 (400/100 MHz) spectrometer using
intermediate of Azamerone.                                 CDCl3 as a solvent. Chemical shifts for 1H and 13C spectra were

Scheme 4. One-Pot-Two-Step Cascade involving (S)- and (R)-Citronellola





aThe scale of the reaction was 30 mg.

                                                             543                                                   https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jnatprod.5c01352
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      J. Nat. Prod. 2026, 89, 539−547