Organic Letters                                             pubs.acs.org/OrgLett                                                    Letter

reaction probably did not proceed via a radical chain pathway     PhH2Si• radical mediated dechlorination of 2za to 2a in the
(Figure S2). Next, when radical scavengers such as TEMPO      presence of excess hydrogen donor PhH2Si• under ambient
((2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl) were added  to the      conditions (Figure S6 in the SI).
model reaction under the standard conditions, the formation of       Based on  these  collective  observations and  theoretical
2a was largely inhibited. When 2 equiv of 1,1-diphenylethene       calculations,  a  plausible  reaction mechanism  is  proposed
was added, the yield of 2a dropped from 82% to 63% (Scheme     (Scheme 3). Initially, the oxidative addition of PhSiH3 to the
2a). These  results  indicated  that  a  silyl-radical-initiated
                                                   Scheme 3. Plausible Reaction Mechanism21
Scheme 2. Mechanistic Studies





                                                         Pd(0) complex affords the silyl palladium hydride intermediate
                                                                A. Upon photoexcitation, complex A undergoes intersystem
                                                                    crossing from  the  singlet  state  to  the  triplet  state. The
                                                                photoexcited species A then undergoes homolytic cleavage to
process19 was  probably  involved  in  this  reaction. When      generate a Pd(I) hydride species and a PhH2Si• radical (B).
PhSiH3 was  replaced  with  d3-phenylsilane  (PhSiD3),  the      Radical B adds to N-acyl benzotriazole, forming intermediate
reaction could produce only trace cyclization product 2a or     C, which undergoes denitrogenation to yield the aryl radical D.
deuterated-2a. However, using D2O to quench the reaction     Subsequent radical cyclization of D produces intermediate E.
with PhSiH3 could produce N-deuterated-2a with 65% yield     Hydrogen atom transfer (HAT) from E to the LnPd(I)−H
(Scheme 2b). The deuterated N-benzoyl benzotriazole (d5-1a)      species then gives the silyloxyphenanthridine intermediate F,
prepared from commercially  available d5-benzoic  acid was      along with the formation of a Pd dihydride species G. Finally,
subjected to a competition reaction experiment with 1a under      species G  releases hydrogen gas to regenerate the Pd(0)
the standard conditions. The KIE values (2a/d4-2a) obtained       catalyst, while F is hydrolyzed during aqueous workup to afford
by intermolecular competition experiment and parallel experi-      the final product 2.
ment were 1.8 and 1.4, respectively, which indicated that the        In conclusion, we have developed a novel photoexcited
ortho C−H bond cleavage of N-benzoyl benzotriazole is not      palladium-catalyzed  denitrogenative  cyclization  of  N-aroyl
involved in the rate-determining step (Scheme 2c). In addition,      benzotriazole derivatives using commercially available palla-
the generation of H2 from Pd/PhSiH3 under photoirradiation     dium  catalysts and PhSiH3 as the hydrogen atom transfer
was also verified by a two-chamber reactor (Scheme 2d).           reagent. This protocol offers a practical and mild synthetic
  The computational investigation was carried out to compare     method  for  phenanthridinones. The  exploration  of more
the two plausible different reaction paths of generating the silyl     photoinduced transformations of benzotriazole derivatives  is
radical. The obtained results show that the silyl radical PhH2Si•      currently underway in our laboratory.
was  probably produced from  the  decomposition  of  the
photoexcited  silyl palladium hydride complex (Figure S4 in                CONTENTthe SI).20 The observed regioisomers (2d, 2h, 2k, and 2s) were    ■ASSOCIATEDData Availability Statement
rationalized  by  theoretical  computation. The  obtained
                                                   The data underlying this study are available in the published
computational  results  suggest  that  the  regioselectivity  is
                                                                                article and its Supporting Information.
determined with the thermodynamic differences between the
                      *sı  Supporting Informationtwo regioisomers instead of the free-energy differences on the
transition states for the cyclization (Figure S5 in the SI). The     The Supporting Information  is  available  free of charge  at
computational results also suggested the plausibility of the      https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.orglett.5c04877.

                                                             730                                                      https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.orglett.5c04877
                                                                                                                                                                       Org. Lett. 2026, 28, 727−733