
=== papers/paper_eda19e7c8edd4b39/documents/main.pdf PDF page 7 ===
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67397-x


pattern (right panel, Fig. 5i) closely matches the experimental dif-   an associated energy barrier of 0.55 eV. An Al-terminated NiAl(100)
fractogram (Fig. 5g), conﬁrming the proposed long-range vacancy   surface is chosen for these calculations, as indicated by its lower sur-
ordering conﬁguration. Similarly, a second model with a (4 × 4 × 4)   face energy compared to the Ni surface termination28. This Al termi-
supercell (left panel, Fig. 5j) is constructed to represent the vacancy   nation is further supported by our XPS measurements of Al 2p and Ni
arrangement observed in the orange-box region of Fig. 5f. The simu-  3p spectra acquired using different photon energies, showing an
lated electron diffraction (right panel, Fig. 5j) reproduces the periodic   increased Al-to-Ni ratio at lower photon energies (Supplementary
weak superlattice reﬂections superimposed on the fundamental β-NiAl   Fig.  6),  consistent with  surface Al-enrichment reported  in the
reﬂections, consistent with the experimental diffractogram (Fig. 5h).     literature29.
    The primary β-NiAl reﬂections (marked by blue circles in Fig. 5g, h)       Furthermore, the analysis of diffusion barriers indicates that, in
remain unchanged, while the additional weak reﬂections (green circles   the bulk, Ni and Al have comparable overall mobility, consistent with
in Fig. 5g, h) arise from vacancy ordering. In the blue-box region in   previous computational studies of stoichiometric β-NiAl30,31. Along the
Fig. 5f, the model suggests that vacancies are evenly distributed along   <110> direction, Ni migration into an adjacent Al vacancy exhibits a
the <110> directions, with an inter-vacancy spacing of ~8.14 Å, which   relatively low barrier of 0.41 eV (Fig. 6c), while the reverse process,
corresponds to twice the spacing along the (110) planes in β-NiAl. The   where an antisite Ni atom returns to a Ni vacancy, requires 0.87 eV. For
spacing between successive parallel rows of ordered vacancies is also    Al, migration to the next-nearest Ni vacancy is unlikely, whereas an Al
~8.14 Å due to the symmetry of the (2 × 2 × 2) supercell. In the orange   antisite atom can spontaneously relocate to a neighboring Al vacancy
box region in Fig. 5f, the model suggests a different periodicity, where    (Fig. 6d). Along the <100> direction, energy barriers are generally
vacancies are arranged in distinct rows. Our model (Fig. 5j) shows that   higher, with Ni diffusion requiring 2.13 eV and Al migration being
the spacing between adjacent vacancies within each row is ~4.07 Å   improbable if adjacent sites are fully occupied. However, introducing
along the <110> direction, while the separation between consecutive   additional vacancies facilitates consecutive jumps, enabling net <100>
vacancy-containing rows is ~16.28 Å. This variation in vacancy con-   migration and signiﬁcantly lowering the energy barriers to 0.74 eV for
centration suggests vacancy migration, driven by the natural tendency   Ni and 0.92 eV for Al. These results indicate that, in bulk NiAl, the
to redistribute from high- to low-concentration regions. Such vacancy   diffusion rates of Ni and Al are broadly comparable, with differences
ordering also indicates atomic migration within the bulk, as vacancy   largely arising from the local distribution of vacancies and antisite
migration is inherently linked to atomic diffusion.                       defects. However, at the surface, these differences in bulk diffusion are
   Upon cooling, the equilibrium concentration of thermal vacancies   ampliﬁed by additional mechanisms. Calculations indicate that Al
decreases, leading to their aggregation. A wider ﬁeld-of-view HAADF   adatoms can exchange with antisite Ni atoms in the topmost lattice
image acquired after cooling from 800 °C to room temperature   layer, promoting Ni accumulation  at the  surface. This  surface-
(Fig. 5k) provides further evidence of vacancy-related features. The   mediated process, coupled with differences in vacancy formation
image reveals orthogonal low-intensity bands extending along the   energies of Ni and Al, drives the preferential formation of Ni-rich γ‘-
[110] and [110] directions (yellow arrows in Fig. 5k), consistent with   Ni3Al precipitates.
preferential aggregation of vacancies in these regions. Notably, the
corresponding diffractogram of the HAADF image (inset of Fig. 5k)  Discussion
lacks the superlattice reﬂections observed at high temperature (Fig. 5g,   Intermetallic compounds such as NiAl are widely used in high-
h). This discrepancy suggests that cooling disrupts the ordered   temperature applications due to their ordered structures and robust-
vacancy conﬁgurations, leading to their aggregation into <110 > -   ness. However, at elevated temperatures, dynamic processes such as
oriented bands rather than maintaining long-range ordering.          vacancy generation, atomic diffusion, and surface segregation can
    Quantitative intensity line-proﬁle analysis of randomly selected  compromise their stability. These effects are difﬁcult to probe directly
{110} planes (purple and cyan rectangles in Fig. 5k) is shown in Fig. 5l.  due to rapid atomic dynamics and the exponential increase in thermal
The proﬁles reveal alternating high-intensity (Ni) and low-intensity (Al)   vacancies governed by Arrhenius behavior. While computational stu-
columns, characteristic of B2 NiAl and consistent with Fig. 5e. How-   dies have predicted comparable bulk diffusion rates for Ni and Al in
ever, Ni columns exhibit signiﬁcant intensity variations (yellow arrows,   stoichiometric NiAl30,31, our experimental results reveal a different
Fig. 5l), providing direct evidence of preferential Ni vacancies. By  outcome at the surface: Ni preferentially segregate outward, driving
contrast, Al columns display far more uniform intensities, suggesting a   the precipitation of γ‘-Ni3Al. This surface-driven process provides an
lower concentration of Al vacancies. Collectively, these results estab-   important  experimental benchmark,  underscoring  the need  to
lish that Ni vacancies dominate in the bulk, driving Ni segregation to   account for surface and near-surface kinetics when evaluating the
the surface and facilitating the subsequent precipitation of γ‘-Ni3Al.     long-term stability of intermetallic alloys, where degradation often
                                                                                      initiates.
Density functional theory (DFT) modeling                             Unlike oxidation-driven Ni3Al formation—caused by preferential
Our DFT calculations on an β-NiAl bulk model indicate that the vacancy   Al consumption during Al2O3 scale growth32—or bulk decomposition in
formation energies for Ni and Al atoms are 0.98 eV and 1.20 eV,   Ni-rich alloys that require quenching and aging22,33–35, the γ‘-Ni3Al pre-
respectively (Fig. 6a), in agreement with other studies26,27. The lower   cipitates observed here form near-stoichiometric NiAl through simple
vacancy formation energy of Ni suggests that Ni vacancies form more   annealing  under  inert  conditions.  This  indicates  that  surface-
readily than Al vacancies, leading to an increased presence of Ni ada-   segregation-induced phase separation is an intrinsic behavior, occur-
toms on the surface that serves as a sink for ejected atoms from the   ring even in the absence of an oxidizing environment. Observed under
bulk to result in a higher concentration of thermal vacancies at the   ultra-high vacuum, this phenomenon reﬂects a fundamental material
elevated temperature.                                            response that arises from surface-bulk coupling rather than bulk dif-
     Additionally, our calculations reveal that once Ni atoms diffuse   fusion disparities or external chemical driving forces. The morphology
outward and occupy sites in the top-most layer, an exchange process   of the precipitates is highly facet-dependent. On NiAl(100), γ‘-Ni3Al
with Al adatoms on the surface can occur, further increasing the    initially forms a coherent wetting layer that may transform into 3D
concentration of Ni adatoms at the surface. As shown in Fig. 6b, the Ni   islands after a critical thickness due to accumulated strain, whereas on
antisite atom in the topmost layer (highlighted in yellow) moves out-   NiAl(110), the larger lattice mismatch promotes 3D island formation
ward, allowing an Al adatom (highlighted in dark blue) to replace it,   from the outset. These observations highlight how interfacial strain
forming a perfect Al terminated NiAl(100) surface. This exchange  and crystallographic orientation govern nucleation pathways and
mechanism results in an overall system energy change of −0.31 eV, with   growth modes in intermetallic systems.



Nature Communications| (2026)17:641                                                                                   7
=== papers/paper_eda19e7c8edd4b39/documents/main.pdf PDF page 8 ===
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67397-x





Fig. 6 | Energetics of vacancies and atomic diffusion in β-NiAl. a Calculated      atoms along the <110> directions (top panel) and <100> directions (bottom
vacancy formation energies in bulk β-NiAl: 0.98 eV for a Ni vacancy and 1.20 eV for   panel) and their associated energy barriers. The raw structure ﬁles used in the NEB
an Al vacancy. b Surface exchange mechanism on Al-terminated NiAl(100), in which   models to compute the diffusion energy barriers are provided in the “Source Data
an Al adatom displaces a Ni antisite (yellow) with an energy barrier of 0.55 eV and a    Files” folder.
net system energy decrease of 0.31 eV. c, d Diffusion pathways for Ni and Al



    Our multimodal analysis provides mechanistic insight into this       This segregation-induced phase separation has important impli-
process. EDS measurements conﬁrm localized Ni enrichment after   cations for material performance. Ni-rich surface precipitates reduce
annealing, while in-situ HRTEM and NEXAFS identify the Ni-rich pre-   the availability of Al required to form a uniform, protective Al₂O₃ scale,
cipitates as γ‘-Ni3Al. Complementary TEM imaging of bulk regions   thereby promoting non-uniform oxide growth and localized oxidation
reveals that Ni out-diffusion from the NiAl matrix generates a sub-   that compromise the overall oxidation resistance. Beyond oxidation,
stantial population of thermal vacancies, which self-organize into   the altered surface composition modiﬁes catalytic activity by changing
ordered arrangement at high temperature and subsequently aggre-   the  balance  of  Ni-Al  active  sites and  shifting  the  electronic
gate upon cooling. Similarly, FFT patterns of the γ‘-Ni3Al phase seg-    structure36,37, with potential consequences for adsorption, reaction
regated at the NiAl surface also exhibit superlattice reﬂections,   pathways, and selectivity. Moreover, the surface separation introduces
indicative of vacancy ordering. Together, these results establish a   microstructural heterogeneity and local  strain, which may drive
direct link between bulk vacancy dynamics and surface segregation,   microcracking during thermal cycling and degrade mechanical stabi-
revealing how thermally activated processes in the bulk can propagate    lity. Over time, continuous Ni depletion also perturbs bulk composi-
to the surface and drive phase separation.                              tion and phase stability, raising concerns for applications requiring




Nature Communications| (2026)17:641                                                                        8