ACS Catalysis                                          pubs.acs.org/acscatalysis                                         Research Article

  Inspired by this work, we investigated heptazines substituted
by three aromatic groups as scaffolds for the development of new
photocatalysts having both high oxidative potency and tunable
properties (Figure 1C). We hereby report the synthesis and full
characterization of a representative set of four photoredox
catalysts based on this design. They can be excited by visible
light, and exhibit oxidative potentials up to +1.69 V vs SCE,
combined with excited-state lifetimes up to 72 ns. Furthermore,
we demonstrate the application of one catalyst to the selective
aerobic photo-oxidation of C−H and C−C bonds in nitrogen-
containing molecules,  significantly expanding the  substrate
scope to include electron-deficient nitrogen compounds such as
amides, ureas, carbamates, and sulfonamides. This catalyst also
shows remarkable selectivity, enabling targeted oxidation in
complex molecules bearing multiple nitrogen atoms.

          AND CHARACTERIZATION OF■SYNTHESISTRIARYL-HEPTAZINES
We initiated our study by revisiting the traditional route to
triaryl-heptazines. Reported syntheses rely on a Friedel−Crafts
type reaction with trichloro-heptazine B.22,23 The latter can itself
be obtained from commercially available melem A (or melon, a
polymeric analog) after hydrolysis in alkaline conditions and
reaction with PCl5  (neat, 130 °C),  following a protocol
described by Kroke.24 Yet, this chlorination step is hazardous
and requires aqueous workup, yielding significant hydrolysis of
B, causing reproducibility issues and yield loss, problems we      Figure 2. Synthesis of triaryl-heptazines. All yields refer to isolated
have personally experienced. To address this, we performed the       material. Bottom right: ORTEP diagram of dFHeptZ. For clarity,
                                                                            disorders of ortho fluorine atoms have been removed; all ortho fluorinechlorination step using thionyl chloride (SOCl2). This reagent
                                                                atoms have an equal chance to be on either ortho positions (see SI for
can be readily removed by evaporation, thus avoiding hydrolytic
                                                                                       details).
conditions while providing a more reliable and safer procedure.
With this solid route to trichloro-heptazine B, we performed
Friedel−Crafts  arylation  using  different  1,3-disubstituted
aromatics to synthesize  triaryl-heptazines  in  yields ranging                                                  dFHeptZ and dClHeptZ  display the  highest  excited-state
from 21% (dOMeHeptZ) to 45% (dMeHeptZ) over three steps                                                                 reduction potentials (+1.67 and +1.69 V vs SCE, respectively).
(Figure 2). Importantly, this method  is scalable, as demon-
                                                             This is especially interesting given the scarcity of photocatalysts
strated by the successful preparation of 1.13 g of dFHeptZ in a                                                                   possessing excited-state reduction potential in this range.6,25
single batch. The substitution pattern of heptazine dFHeptZ
                                                                Fluorescence decay times were measured in the range of 23 to 72
was confirmed by X-ray diffraction analysis (CCDC 2500322),
                                                                           ns, suggesting good photocatalytic activities.
also revealing a quasiplanar molecular structure. Noteworthy,
                                                To gain more insight into this light-promoted electronic
these catalysts were stable upon storage in the dark, showing no
                                                                            transition, DFT and TD-DFT calculations were performed atsigns of decomposition after one year at rt, under air.
                                                                 the b3lyp/6−311G+(d,p) and TD PBE0/6−311+G(d,p) levels  Since our intention was to use these triaryl-heptazines as
                                                                      of theory (see SI). For dFHeptZ, the electronic density of thephotoredox catalysts, we next measured their photochemical
                                  HOMO  is primarily localized on the nitrogen atoms of theand redox properties, starting with dFHeptZ. The UV−visible
                                                                 heptazine core, whereas for the LUMO, the electronic density isabsorption spectrum  of dFHeptZ  revealed two  residual
                                                                      distributed over the entire molecule, with no overlap betweenabsorptions at 422 and 449 nm (ε = 410 and 450 L.mol−1.cm−1,
                                                                 the two orbitals (Figure 3E).26−29 A similar pattern is observedrespectively), and  the  fluorescence spectrum showed  a
                                                                         for dClHeptZ and dMeHeptZ (not shown, see SI). In contrast,maximum emission at 524 nm (Figure 3A). Cyclic voltammetry
                                                dOMeHeptZ, which  contains  electron-donating methoxyindicated a reversible (or pseudoreversible) reduction at −0.90
V vs SCE (Figure 3B). With these data, the reduction potential      groups, deviates from this pattern, with its HOMO electron
of  the  excited  state  of dFHeptZ was determined  to be      density  localized  essentially on  the 2,4-dimethoxyphenyl
E°(dFHeptZ*/dFHeptZ•−) = 1.67 V vs the SCE, highlighting      substituents (not shown, see SI). Calculations show that for
the potency of this catalyst for oxidation reactions. Moreover,     dFHeptZ, dClHeptZ, and dMeHeptZ, the weak absorption
time-resolved fluorescence revealed a relatively long decay time     band in the visible region corresponds to a symmetry-forbidden
(⟨τ⟩= 52 ns, Figure 3C), potentially favorable for electron      highest occupied molecular orbital−the lowest unoccupied
transfer reactions through collisional quenching.                   molecular orbital (HOMO−LUMO) transition, consistent with
  These analyses were performed with  all heptazines, and     low ε and long decay time. For dOMeHeptZ, the absorption
results are summarized in Figure 3D. As expected, the least     band corresponds to a HOMO−3 to LUMO transition, which is
oxidizing heptazine is dOMeHeptZ, bearing electron-donating       also symmetry-forbidden. Overall, the computed absorption
methoxy substituents, with an excited-state reduction potential      energies closely match with the experimental data, offering a
of E°(dOMeHeptZ*/dOMeHeptZ •−) = 1.39 V vs SCE.       clear theoretical understanding of the optical properties of these
Conversely, the fluoride- and chloride-substituted heptazines       triaryl-heptazines.

                                                             1686                                                       https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.5c08082
                                                                                                                                      ACS Catal. 2026, 16, 1684−1695