                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

        Paper                                                                             Green Chemistry


                                                                 mediated pathway featuring intramolecular hydroxyl-to-sulfinyl
                                                                  oxygen transfer.
                                                               The final C–S/O reorganization delivers the sulfoxide 3 with
                                                                               exclusive Z-selectivity. DFT calculations reveal that the Z-isomer
                                                                                          is thermodynamically favored over the E-isomer by 1.5 kcal
                                                                      mol−1,  likely due  to the minimization  of  steric repulsion
                                                                 between the sulfinyl moiety and the ester group, a configuration
                                                                             further corroborated by X-ray crystallographic analysis.


                                                     3.  Conclusion

                                                                       In summary, we have developed an electrochemical sulfinyla-
                                                                           tion  protocol  that  couples  sulfenylation  with  skeletal
AM.                                                                 rearrangement  of  Baylis–Hillman  adducts.  This  strategy
                                                                      enables  late-stage access to methyl  (Z)-3-(aryl/heteroaryl)-2-
                                                                                 [(aryl/alkyl)sulfinyl]methyl acrylate under mild, metal-free, and4:04:02                                                                            oxidant-free conditions. The method proceeds in an undivided
                                                                                        cell  using  inexpensive  KI  as both  electrolyte and  redox
                                                                      mediator, delivering products in good to excellent yields with3/12/2026
                                                                 broad substrate scope and scalability. DFT studies, together
on
                                                                     with control experiments, provided mechanistic support for a
                                                                              radical pathway featuring intramolecular hydroxyl-to-sulfinyl
                                                                  oxygen transfer. Ongoing work is focused on expanding thisDownloaded                                                                       sustainable electrochemical rearrangement strategy to other
2026.                                                                          classes of functionalized scaﬀolds.
January                                                  4.  Experimental section02
on                                                                                  4.1.  General method

                                                                                     All solvents used in this study were distilled and dried before
                                                                            use, according to standard procedures. 1H, 13C and 19F NMRPublished
                                                                          spectra were collected at Varian Unity Inova-600 or a Varian
                                                                    Mercury-400 NMR  instrument  using  CDCl3  as  solvent.
                                                                Chemical shifts were reported in δ (ppm),  relative to the
                                                                            internal standard, TMS. The signals observed are described as
                                                                            s (singlet), d (doublet), t (triplet), and m (multiplet). Coupling
                                                                       constants are reported as J values in Hz. Mass spectrometry
                                                              was obtained using a Jeol JMS-HX 110 spectrometer. LC ana-
                                                                                 lyses were performed on SHIMADZU Model: LC-2050C 3D, and
                                                                       the LC mass  spectra (LC-MS) analyses were recorded on
                                                                 DPiMS-2020.  The  Liquid  chromatography-tandem  mass
                                                                          spectra (LC-MSMS) analyses were recorded on LC-8045. The
                                                                         protein analyses were performed on a Waters SYNAPT HDMS
                                                           Q-TOF mass  (ESI-Q-TOF)  spectrum. The  X-ray  diﬀraction
                                                              measurements were carried out using a Bruker D8 VENTURE
                                                   XRD instrument. Cyclic voltammetry was performed on a CHI
         Scheme 3  Control experiments.                                 Instruments 750A potentiostat using acetonitrile as solvent.
                                                            The melting points were recorded on a Büchi 535 melting
                                                                       point   apparatus  and   are   uncorrected.   Thin   Layer
                                                               Chromatography (TLC) was performed using silica gel 60 F254
          well-defined transition state TS (+8.9 kcal mol−1), releasing HI   (Merck) plates. An undivided electrochemical cell equipped
        and delivering the observed sulfoxide 3. Proton reduction at   with platinum electrodes (IKA) was used, with dimensions of
         the cathode accounts for H2 evolution. Together, the experi-   0.7 cm × 0.7 cm × 0.2 cm for small-scale reactions and 2.8 cm
         mental observations and DFT calculations support a radical-  × 0.7 cm × 0.2 cm for larger-scale reactions. A GW Instek



          2114  | Green Chem., 2026, 28, 2109–2122                                                      This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2026