Article                                                                                 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-68049-w


excellent chemical stability, unprecedentedly high solvent permeance   descriptors indicate that they  all possess sufﬁcient reactivity to
(i.e., methanol ~ 32.5, acetone ~ 78.7, and hexane ~ 47.4 L m‒2 h‒1 bar‒1)   undergo rapid polycondensation with TMC, with the nucleophilicity
and concomitantly low molecular weight cutoff of ~ 300 Da over a wide   indices following an order of ODA (4.26 eV) > 6FODA (3.68 eV) > PFMB
range of solvent polarity. This work affords a promising platform for   (3.56 eV) (Supplementary Figs. 4 and 5), enabling the fabrication of PA
the rational design of high-performance nanoﬁlm membranes with   nanoﬁlms via scalable liquid-liquid interfacial polymerization  (IP).
great scalability, offering a sustainable and low-carbon solution for   Unfortunately, the recruited aromatic diamine monomers are pri-
ultrafast and precise molecular separations over a wide spectrum of   marily composed of aromatic rings with hydrophobic substituents,
solvent polarity.                                             and they exhibit poor solubility in water at ambient conditions. To
                                                                         tackle this issue, we developed an ionic liquid (IL) assisted IP process
Results                                                              that leverages the superior dissolution  ability of [C4mim]BF4 to
Rational design and synthesis of microporous PA nanoﬁlms with   enhance the solubility of the diamine monomers in water (Supple-
Janus frameworks                                            mentary Fig. 6)28, allowing us to perform the IP synthesis via a highly
4,4’-oxybis[3-(triﬂuoromethyl)aniline]  (6FODA),   containing  two   scalable way (Fig. 1f). The high solubility of the aromatic diamines in a
4-aminophenyl groups linked by a phenyl ether bond with one ortho   binary mixture of [C4mim]BF4 and water was conﬁrmed at con-
triﬂuoromethyl (–CF3) substituent on each benzene ring, was identi-   centrations of more than 1.0% (wt/v) (Supplementary Fig. 7), which was
ﬁed as the building block for polymerization with trimesoyl chloride   further corroborated by the formation of the robust, self-sustaining PA
(TMC) to construct a 3D crosslinked microporous PA polymer. We   nanoﬁlms at the free interface (Supplementary Fig. 8).
envision that the steric hindrance effect of the two bulky –CF3 sub-
stituents at the ortho position of the para-linked ether bond in 6FODA  Chemical and microporous structural characterization of PA
would generate non-coplanar contorted aromatic fragments with  nanoﬁlm membranes
subtle chain rigidity in the resulting PA, which resonate with ﬂexible  PA thin-ﬁlm composite (TFC) membranes were prepared directly on
amide linkages to construct a PA framework with highly  inter-   porous polyacrylonitrile (PAN) ultraﬁltration substrate via in situ IP,
connected hourglass-shaped network voids, conferring efﬁcient size-  and the resulting membranes are denoted as 6FODA-M, ODA-M, and
sieving capability and rapid migration of solvent molecules. Simulta-  PFMB-M, respectively. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) and opti-
neously, the ﬂuorine-rich –CF3 pendants on the polymer backbone   cal microscope surface images conﬁrm the formation of ﬂat, con-
appropriately modulate the hydrophobicity and polarity of PA, pro-   tinuous PA nanoﬁlms devoid of visible cracks, pinholes, or other
viding another degree of freedom for tuning solvent dissolution and   defects (Fig. 2a, b and Supplementary Figs. 9–11). Their intact struc-
anti-swelling stability (Fig. 1b). In the same vein, 4,4’-diaminodiphenyl   tures are further substantiated by the uniform distribution of surface
ether (ODA) and 2,2’-bis(triﬂuoromethyl)benzidine (PFMB) without   elements acquired by SEM with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
ortho –CF3 substituents or ﬂexible phenyl ether linkages were   (SEM-EDS, Supplementary Fig. 12). Atomic force microscope (AFM)
employed as model monomers for comparison, through which a bet-   surface images reveal that the PA nanoﬁlms have very smooth surfaces
ter understanding of the intrinsic correlation between the membrane   with low roughness (Ra) of 3.7–5.6 nm (Fig. 2c and Supplementary
structure and solvent transport could be gained, critical for rational   Fig. 13). AFM height proﬁle analysis shows that the accurate thick-
membrane design but remains a critical knowledge gap.               nesses of the free-standing PA nanoﬁlms are less than 20 nm, with the
    Molecular spatial conﬁgurations of the three aromatic diamines   speciﬁc thickness of 6FODA-M PA being ~ 13 nm, approaching the
reveal that the torsion of the two benzene rings through the phenyl   thickness of the thinnest polymer ﬁlm reported to date (Fig. 2d and
ether or biphenyl linkage generates a spiral noncoplanar con-   Supplementary Figs. 14 and 15). The formation of such ultrathin and
formation with an inter-benzene ring dihedral angle of 75.2–81.6°.  smooth PA nanoﬁlms can be attributed to the retarded diffusion of the
The ﬂexible phenyl ether bonds with a bond angle of about 118° in   bulkier aromatic diamine monomers during IP and their relatively low
ODA and 6FODA offer additional polymer chain ﬂexibility and tor-   reactivity with TMC relative to archetypical diamines like phenylene-
sional freedom (Fig. 1c). In-depth analysis of the dihedral angle   diamine and piperazine (Supplementary Figs. 16–21)29,30. Surface zeta
distributions at different junctions of the PA backbones after   potential measurements disclose that  all three PA nanoﬁlms are
crosslinking with TMC show that the torsion of the phenyl ether   negatively charged at neutral pH with an isoelectric point of less than
bonds in 6FODA is restrained by the steric hindrance of the ortho  pH = 5 (Fig. 2e). Attenuated total reﬂection–Fourier transform infrared
–CF3 substituents. The bond rotation angle is restricted within a   (ATR–FTIR, Fig. 2f and Supplementary Fig. 20), Raman spectra (Sup-
range of 240°, while the ether bonds in ODA rotate 360° freely   plementary Fig. 22), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS,
(Fig. 1d). The torsional energy barriers of the corresponding bond   Fig. 2g) conﬁrm their chemical structures as aromatic PAs. Quantiﬁ-
linkages in 6FODA-TMC PA are approximately one order of magni-   cation of elemental composition by high-resolution XPS spectra
tude higher than those of ODA-TMC PA, and the torsion angles are   illuminates the  crosslinking degrees  of ODA-M, 6FODA-M, and
mainly concentrated at 60° and −120° (Supplementary Fig.  1).  PFMB-M PA nanoﬁlms, which are determined to be 76.3, 68.1, and
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations further demonstrate the for-   30.0%  (Fig.  2h, Supplementary  Figs. 23–26 and Supplementary
mation of noncoplanar conformations in the  spatially stacked   Tables 1 and 2), respectively, aligning closely with the distinct amina-
polymer network of 6FODA-TMC PA, which frustrates the efﬁcient   tion reactivity of the diamine monomers. Owing to the presence of
packing of the polyamide chains and thus results in relatively large   –CF3 groups on the PA skeletons of 6FODA-M and PFMB-M, these two
microporosity with enhanced interconnectivity of network voids  membranes exhibit distinctly larger surface water contact angles of
(Supplementary Figs. 2 and 3). The contorted, noncoplanar hydro-   95.5 and 100.4°, respectively, compared with ODA-M (72.9°) and
phobic segmental structures resonating with the ﬂexible hydrophilic   conventional PA membranes (Fig. 2h, Supplementary Fig. 27 and
amide linkages ultimately form a 3D crosslinked Janus microporous   Supplementary Table 3). Vapor sorption experiments reveal that
PA framework that seamlessly integrates rigidity and ﬂexibility as   hydrophilic ODA-M preferentially adsorbs polar methanol, while
well as hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity (Fig. 1e).                   highly ﬂuorinated 6FODA-M shows a stronger afﬁnity toward nonpolar
    The nucleophilic addition-elimination reactivity of the three dia-   hexane, conﬁrming the effective regulation of solvent afﬁnity by the
mine monomers was further examined using density functional theory   –CF3 substituents (Fig. 2i and Supplementary Fig. 28)31.
(DFT) to calculate the electrostatic potential (ESP), average local      The average interchain spacing of three PA nanoﬁlms was esti-
ionization energy (ALIE), nucleophilicity index, and local electron  mated from the average d-spacing of their powder X-ray diffraction
attachment  energy  (LEAE).  These  multidimensional  electronic   (XRD) peaks32, which fall in the range of 4.7–5.6 Å with an order of



Nature Communications| (2026)17:1288                                                                        3