                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

       Green Chemistry                                                                               Paper





         Scheme 2  Larger-scale synthetic applications.




         Experimental  section),  underscoring  the  broad  substrate   tected. Under standard reaction conditions with thiol 2a, sub-
AM.       scope, functional group tolerance, and robustness of this KI-   strate 8 furnished compound 9 in 67% yield, while retaining
         mediated electrochemical protocol.                             the Boc-protected hydroxyl group, demonstrating that the –OH
          To assess the practicality of this protocol, we conducted a   functionality  of  1a   is  indispensable   for   sulfinylation4:04:02         gram-scale reaction using the model substrate (5.0 mmol, five-  (Scheme 3g). Finally, isotope labeling experiments provided
          fold increase). The reaction proceeded smoothly to deliver 3aa   direct confirmation. Reaction of 18O-labeled 1a (1a-18O) with
          in 75% isolated yield (Scheme 2). Although the yield on this   thiol 2a delivered 3aa-18O, unambiguously establishing the3/12/2026
          scale was slightly lower than that obtained on the 1.0 mmol   hydroxyl  group  as  the  intramolecular  oxygen  source
on
           scale, the transformation maintained high eﬃciency with only  (Scheme 3h). In contrast, reactions performed in the presence
         a  minor  adjustment  in  reaction  time,  underscoring  its   of H2 18O gave only unlabeled 3aa, excluding water as a contri-
           scalability.                                                  butor (Scheme 3i). Another important control experiment wasDownloaded        To elucidate the mechanism of the electro-rearrangement,   carried out using diphenyl disulfide as a surrogate for thiophe-
2026.      we conducted a series of control experiments (Scheme 3). The   nol under our standard electrochemical conditions. The reac-         transformation was completely suppressed by radical scaven-   tion successfully produced the desired product in 58% isolated
          gers such as TEMPO, BHT, and p-benzoquinone, and HRMS   yield, lower than the 83% yield obtained with thiophenol.January      confirmed the corresponding TEMPO adducts (4), consistent   Nevertheless, this transformation further supports the involve-
02       with trapping of a thiol radical (2′). Likewise, the use of 5,5-  ment of thiyl radicals as key intermediates in the proposed
on
          dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide (DMPO) inhibited product  for-  mechanism (Scheme 3j).
        mation and aﬀorded the DMPO adduct 5, further corroborated    On the basis of control experiments, EPR spectroscopy,
         by EPR analysis (Fig. 3). Together, these results establish the   cyclic voltammetry (Fig. 4), and DFT calculations (Fig. 5), wePublished
         involvement of radical intermediates (Scheme 3a and b). We   propose the mechanism outlined in Scheme 4. Cyclic voltam-
          carried out the reaction under our optimized conditions in the  metry of model substrate 1a showed no discernible oxidation
         presence of 18-crown-6 to examine whether K+ plays a non-   peaks, whereas 2a exhibited an oxidation peak at +1.30 V (vs.
         innocent  role.  The  addition  of  18-crown-6  significantly   Ag/Ag+), consistent with one-electron oxidation at the anode
         decreased the product yield, likely due to the strong complexa-   surface to generate the thiol radical 2′ (Fig. 4). In contrast, KI
          tion of K+, which lowers ion mobility and disrupts the optimal   exhibited two distinct anodic events at +0.44 V and +0.75 V (vs.
          electrochemical environment. These results indicate that free   Ag/Ag+), confirming  its electrochemical activation to iodine
        K+ ions play a beneficial role in promoting eﬃcient iodide oxi-   radicals (Fig. 4).
         dation (Scheme 3c). We also performed a control experiment    We propose that radical addition of 2′ to 1a generates inter-
          to detect the reaction intermediate (II-aaI) at the half-reaction  mediate I, which couples with an iodine radical to aﬀord II (M
          time, and successfully observed it by mass spectrometry, pro-  + H+ = 429.0017, observed by HRMS), consistent with the
          viding  strong  support   for  our  proposed  mechanism   strong anodic peak at +1.16 V (vs. Ag/Ag+) detected in the CV
        (Scheme 3d). We next investigated the origin of the oxygen   analysis (Fig. 4). Rotation around the C–C bond furnishes con-
        atom in product 3aa. Conversion of compound 6 was reacted   former  II′. DFT analysis shows that the subsequent iodide-
         with benzyl thiol 2a furnished sulfide methyl (Z)-3-phenyl-2-   assisted H-shuttle proceeds on a shallow and continuous
          ((phenylthio)methyl)acrylate (7), but not 3aa, and further oxi-   potential energy surface without a resolvable first-order saddle
         dation attempts of 7 under standard conditions failed to yield   point. A relaxed PES scan reveals a smooth and monotonic
         the sulfinylated product (Scheme 3e and f). These two con-   energy  rise from  II′ to the hydrogen-bonded intermediate
          secutive experiments confirm that the oxygen atom in product   III-HI, indicating that this process does not involve a discrete
         3aa does not originate from the external environment, but   proton-transfer transition state but instead reflects a facile
          rather arises from the rearrangement of the –OH group to the   iodide-mediated hydrogen relay. Intramolecular cyclization of
           sulfinyl (S(O)) moiety. Additional evidence was obtained from    III furnishes the five-membered S–O intermediate (Fig. 5 and
          substrate 8, in which the hydroxyl group of 1a was Boc-pro-  Scheme 4). The final C–S/O reorganization occurs through a



           This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2026                                              Green Chem., 2026, 28, 2109–2122  | 2113