
=== papers/paper_3316e45a74258fb7/documents/main.pdf PDF page 2 ===
Y. Yan et al.                                                                                                                         Dyes and Pigments 247 (2026) 113467

non-radiative energy loss. TPA with a propeller-like configuration pro­     quinoxaline (DCTP) core. The products were purified using column
vides the potential of aggregation induced emission (AIE) for efficient    chromatography followed by recrystallization. The target material was
emission in the aggregate states [30]. Compared to conventional D–A     comprehensively characterized by 1H&13C nuclear magnetic resonance
structures, D–A–D-type TADF molecules  offer greater  potential to    (NMR) and high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS).
broaden HOMO distribution, extend π-conjugation, and enhance hori­       The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the three materials were
zontal dipole orientation.                                             determined by cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements in dichloro­
   Herein, three red TADF molecules were designed and synthesized by    methane solution at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, using the ferrocene/fer­
adopting an asymmetrical multi-donor strategy. Dibenzo[f,h]pyrazino    rocenium  (Fc/Fc+)  redox  couple  as  an  internal  reference.  As
[2,3-b]quinoxaline (DCTP) featuring a conjugated planar structure    summarized in Table S2, TD-2T, CD-2T, and TD-2C exhibited similar
was employed as the electron acceptor, and triphenylamine (TPA) and/   HOMO energy levels of −5.15, −5.20, and −5.16 eV, respectively,
or phenylcarbazole (PhCz) were used as the electron donors (Fig. 1).     reflecting the comparable electron-donating strength of their donor
4,4′,4’’-(Dibenzo[f,h]pyrazino[2,3-b]quinoxaline-3,6,11-triyl)tris(N,N-     combinations. The optical band gaps (Eg) estimated from the absorption
diphenylaniline) (TD-2T), was constructed as the basic structure in this     onset were 2.19, 2.17, and 2.14 eV, respectively. The corresponding
study. To achieve further redshift the wavelength and suppress non-   LUMO energy levels, derived from the equation LUMO = HOMO + Eg,
radiative transitions, two modified asymmetrical molecules: 4,4’-(11-    were calculated to be −2.96, −3.03, and −3.02 eV. These electro­
(4-(9H-carbazol-9-yl)phenyl)dibenz-o[f,h]pyrazino[2,3-b]quinoxaline-     chemically determined energy levels show good agreement with the
3,6-diyl)bis(N,N-diphenylaniline) (CD-2T) and 4-(3,6-bis(4-(9H-carba­     trends observed in theoretical calculations (Table S1), although some
zol-9-yl)phenyl)dibenzo[f,h]pyrazino[2,3-b]quinoxalin-11-yl)-N,N-         deviations in absolute values are expected due to the different envi­
diphenylaniline (TD-2C) were developed by introducing PhCz as the    ronments considered. The gradual narrowing of the band gap from TD-
second donor(s) in different substituted positions of accepto. The    2T to TD-2C correlates well with the enhanced intramolecular charge-
introduction of PhCz enhances the electronegativity of the core and the     transfer (ICT) character resulting from the strategic introduction of
rigidity of the molecule, contributing to redshift in the emission wave­     secondary donor groups, which is consistent with the observed red-shift
length and increase in the photoluminescence quantum yield, thus     in photoluminescence. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differ­
realizing “the redder, the brighter”.                                           ential scanning calorimetry (DSC) were employed to evaluate the ther­
                                                             mal  stability  of  the  three  materials  for vacuum  deposition. The
2. Results and discussion                                           decomposition temperatures (Td, equivalent to 5 % weight loss) of TD-
                                                                     2T, CD-2T, and TD-2C are 502 ◦C, 533 ◦C, and 506 ◦C, respectively. The
2.1. Synthesis and characterization                                            glass transition temperature (Tg) value of TD-2T was 197 ◦C, while no
                                                                                 significant glass transition was observed for CD-2T and TD-2C. These
   Following Suzuki cross-coupling between 2,3-diamino-5-bromopyra­     thermal performance results show that all three materials have good
zine and either 4-(diphenylamine)phenylboronic acid (TPA) or 4-(9H-     thermal stability and are suitable for vacuum deposition fabrication of
carbazol-9-yl)phenylboronic acid (PhCz), three target compounds were     devices(Fig. S1).
synthesized via a subsequent dehydration-cyclization reaction with 3,6-
dibromophena -nthrene-9,10-dione derivatives. The resulting products
exhibited D-A-D and D-A-D′ configurations. The acceptor (A) unit con­     2.2. Theoretical calculation
tains four nitrogen atoms, which significantly enhance the electron-
withdrawing capability of the molecule. The three electron-donating         All quantum chemical  calculations were performed  using  the
groups are connected to the 3, 6, and 11 positions of the multi nitro­     Gaussian 09 program package. The ground-state (S0) geometries of all
gen fused ring rigid planar receptor dibenzo[f,h]pyrazino -[2,3-b]     molecules were fully optimized using density functional theory (DFT)
                                                                    with the B3LYP functional and the 6-31G(d,p) basis set. Based on the





                       Fig. 1. Chemical structure of red light emitting molecules of D-A-D and D-A-D′ phenanthroline pyrazine derivatives.

                                                                        2
=== papers/paper_3316e45a74258fb7/documents/main.pdf PDF page 3 ===
Y. Yan et al.                                                                                                                         Dyes and Pigments 247 (2026) 113467

optimized S0 structures, the excited-state properties, including the en­     structure, the HOMO energy level is mainly distributed on the donor at
ergies of the low-lying singlet and triplet states (S1 and T1), were     the 3 and 6 positions, and some are distributed at the 11 donor. Due to
calculated using time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT) at the same level of     the strong electron-donating ability of triphenylamine, the HOMO en­
theory (B3LYP/6-31G(d,p)). The singlet-triplet energy gaps (ΔEST) were     ergy level is mainly distributed on triphenylamine, and some extend to
obtained directly from the differences between the computed S1 and T1     the central nucleus. Both HOMO and LUMO of the three materials
energies. Natural transition orbital (NTO) analyses were carried out     exhibit a state of separation for the most part, so it can be inferred that
using the Multiwfn 3.8 software package based on the TD-DFT output.     there is a significant charge transfer state in the excited state, which is
The dihedral angles between the donor units and the DCTP acceptor    conducive to the transition of electrons.
core, as shown in Fig. 2, play a decisive role in balancing the competing         Fig. S2 shows that different donors have different effects on LUMO
factors that govern TADF performance. The relatively small dihedral     energy levels, according to the electrostatic potential (ESP) analysis,
angles (10.5–18.1◦) between the pyrazine-adjacent donors and the     phenanthropyrazine derivative receptor DCTP has a strong electron-
acceptor enhance electronic coupling, which is directly reflected in the    withdrawing ability, the strongest negative potential center is located
increased oscillator strengths. This is particularly evident for TD-2C,     near the nitrogen atom, the highest value near the nitrogen atom of the
which exhibits the highest oscillator strength (0.80). Concurrently, the    TD-2T molecular acceptor nucleus is −6.168 e−2, and the values of CD-
specific spatial arrangement of the donors, especially the larger dihedral    2T and TD-2C are −5.519 e−2 and -5.682 e−2, respectively, which also
angles (35.9–39.3◦) for the phenanthrene-attached donors, creates suf­     correspond to the LUMO energy level of the three molecules.
ficient spatial separation between the HOMO and LUMO distributions.        In addition, by introducing donor groups at three  sites of the
This orbital separation is crucial for minimizing the exchange energy,     acceptor, the three molecules of LUMO, LUMO+1, and LUMO+2 have
thereby resulting in the small singlet-triplet energy gaps essential for     similar distribution patterns on the receptor nucleus, while HOMO,
efficient reverse intersystem crossing. Furthermore, the rigid, three-   HOMO−1, and HOMO−2 on the surrounding donor groups also have
dimensional configuration imposed by these dihedral angles effec­     similar distribution patterns, as shown in Fig. S4, which means that TD-
tively restricts molecular vibration and rotation, thereby suppressing     2T, CD-2T, and TD-2C all have three quasi-degenerate occupied and
non-radiative decay pathways. All three molecules share the same    unoccupied molecular orbitals according to DFT calculations. Similar
acceptor core, resulting in similar LUMO distributions that are localized     distribution patterns give CT features to occupied and unoccupied or­
on the DCTP core and partially extend to the benzene ring adjacent to      bits. This degeneracy originates from the intramolecular charge transfer
the pyrazine ring (Fig. 2b). For TD-2T molecules with a single donor     (ICT) between the multiple donors and the DCTP core. Furthermore, the





Fig. 2. (a) Molecular structure and optimized ground state geometry of TD-2T, CD-2T, and TD-2C, (b) HOMO and LUMO distributions, and (c) singlet and triplet
energy levels.

                                                                        3
=== papers/paper_3316e45a74258fb7/documents/main.pdf PDF page 4 ===
Y. Yan et al.                                                                                                                         Dyes and Pigments 247 (2026) 113467

introduction of phenylcarbazole as a secondary donor enhances the    were measured in toluene solution, as shown in Fig. 3. The corre­
degeneracy in both the energy and spatial distribution of the molecular    sponding data are summarized in Table 1. As shown in the UV–Vis
orbitals.                                                                      spectra, all compounds display strong absorption bands below 400 nm,
   To further explore the exciton channels in the molecule, natural     attributed to local excited (LE) states of the donor and acceptor seg­
transition orbital simulations were performed on TD-2T, CD-2T, and     ments. In addition, broad and weak absorption bands between 400 and
TD-2C molecules, and derived from Multiwfn3.8 according to the    600 nm arise from intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) transitions.
Gaussian 09 output, as shown in Fig. S3. NTO analysis revealed signif­    Compared with TD-2T, both CD-2T and TD-2C showed red-shifted
icant differences in the properties of excited states under different mo­     charge transfer (CT) absorption peaks upon the introduction of the
lecular configurations: for TD-2T molecules, the hole-electrons in the S1     strongly electron-donating TPA at position 11 of the DCTP core. The CT
state showed complete separation characteristics, showing an obvious     absorption peak shifted from 503 nm to 531 nm for CD-2T and 534 nm
CT state, while in the T1 state, the HOMO orbital electron cloud was     for TD-2C, with TD-2C exhibiting the most pronounced redshift.
mainly distributed on the phenylcarbazole at positions 3 and 6, and         All compounds exhibited broad, structureless photoluminescence
partially extended on the acceptor, and the electrons and holes had a     (PL) spectra in toluene, indicative of excited states with intramolecular
partial overlapping state, which was consistent with the characteristics     charge transfer (ICT) characteristics. TD-2T exhibits an emission peak at
of the HLCT state. However, the ΔEST of TD-2T molecule is 0.34 eV, and    603 nm, whereas CD-2T and TD-2C show red-shifted peaks at 616 nm
the narrow single triplet energy range is conducive to the antisystem    and 621 nm, respectively. The variation in donor symmetry significantly
leap of excitons. In the T1 state, the electron density of the HOMO is     influences the emission wavelength, which can be attributed to the
delocalized across all three donor units, exhibiting a nearly linear dis­     push–pull electronic effect induced by the incorporation of a second
tribution between the donor attached at the 11-position and the donor at    donor group. The introduction of the second donor has a modulating
the 3-position of the acceptor core, while also showing partial overlap      effect on the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level
with the LUMO electron cloud, indicative of a hybridized local and    through intramolecular charge transfer, resulting in a redshift in the
charge-transfer (HLCT) state. In addition, for CD-2T and TD-2C mole­     emission spectrum. The photoluminescence quantum yields (ΦPL) of TD-
cules with different donors, the HOMO orbital electron cloud in the S1     2T, CD-2T, and TD-2C in toluene were measured to be 31.09 %, 13.23
state is completely separated from the LUMO electron cloud in the tri­    %, and 65.91 %, respectively. This trend correlates with their corre­
phenylamine with strong electron donor ability, and belongs to the CT    sponding oscillator strengths. TD-2C exhibited the highest ΦPL, attrib­
state, and the HOMO electron cloud partially extends to the DCTP     uted to its unique D–A–D′ molecular configuration. The steric hindrance
acceptor in the T1 state, which partially overlaps with the LUMO orbital    from the diphenylcarbazole donor effectively suppresses non-radiative
and is in the LE state. When the molecular configuration changes from D-    decay pathways such as intramolecular vibration and rotation. Phos­
A-D to D-A-D′, the energy level of the singlet state decreases signifi­     phorescence spectra in 2-methyltetrahydrofuran were recorded at 77 K
cantly, indicating that the introduction of the second donor is helpful to     to determine the S1 and T1 energy levels of the three compounds, as
regulate the energy level value of the singlet state. The three molecules    shown in Fig. 3. The S1 energy levels of TD-2T, CD-2T, and TD-2C were
all have small singlet and triplet energy ranges, as well as large SOC    determined to be 2.25, 2.28, and 2.25 eV, respectively, while the cor­
values, which means that the excitons of the T1 energy level can return     responding T1 levels were 2.15, 2.20, and 2.10 eV. Consequently, all
to S1 through the fast anti-system channel, and then return to the ground     three compounds exhibit small singlet–triplet energy gaps (ΔEST) of
state S0 through the radiative transition. Therefore, TD-2T, CD-2T and     0.10, 0.08, and 0.15 eV, respectively. Similar to other TADF emitters
TD-2C molecules can effectively utilize triplet excitons in the RISC    based on PhCz and TPA, thermally activated delayed fluorescence
process to improve the exciton utilization rate and achieve efficient    (TADF) behavior was observed in the solid state for all three compounds.
utilization of the device.                                           To investigate the luminescence properties in a fixed conformational
   In addition, Fig. S5 is a schematic diagram of the horizontal transi­      state, transient photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured in thin-
tion dipole moment (TDM) of TD-2T, CD-2T, and TD-2C molecules. The     film form (Fig. 3), with the corresponding data summarized in Table 1.
transition dipole moments of TD-2T molecules are mainly distributed in    According to the fitted decay curves, the prompt fluorescence lifetimes
the y-plane and partly in the x-plane and z-plane, the transition dipole      (τps) of TD-2T, CD-2T, and TD-2C were determined to be 6.98 ns, 6.23
moments of CD-2T molecules are mainly distributed in the x-plane and     ns, and 5.84 ns, respectively, while their delayed fluorescence lifetimes
partly distributed in the y-plane and z-plane, and the transition dipole      (τds) were 19.83 μs, 23.72 μs, and 16.04 μs. The relatively short τds
moments of TD-2C molecules are mainly distributed in the x-plane and     values indicate efficient reverse intersystem crossing (RISC) processes in
partly in the y-plane and z-plane. The TDMs of the three molecules were      all three  materials. The photoluminescence quantum  yields (ΦPL)
mainly arranged along the long axis of the molecule, and the direction of    measured in the film state were 14.65 % for TD-2T, 4.81 % for CD-2T,
the transition dipole moment of the single donor TD-2T molecule was    and 40.86 % for TD-2C, consistent with the trends observed in toluene
directed from the DCTP plane to the donor group at the 3 site, indicating     solution. Notably, as shown in Table 1, compared to the symmetric
that the charge transfer mainly occurred between the DCTP plane and    molecule TD-2T and the asymmetric molecule CD-2T, the asymmetric
the donor group at the 3 site. In the polydonor CD-2T molecule, the     molecule TD-2C exhibits a higher radiative decay rate (kr), a lower non-
direction of the transition dipole moment is directed from the DCTP     radiative decay rate (knr), and a higher luminescence quantum yield.
plane to the TPA group at the 3 position, and in the TD-2C molecule, the     This demonstrates that in multi-donor asymmetric substitution struc­
DCTP plane is directed to the TPA group at the 11 position. The results     tures, incorporating strongly electron-donating triphenylamine at the
show that in the polydonor molecule, the direction of charge transfer     11-position while introducing more rigid phenylcarbazole as donor
within the molecule mainly occurs between the DCTP plane and the TPA     groups   at  the  3,6-positions  can   significantly  enhance  TADF
group with stronger electron-donor ability. The dipole moment direction     performance.
of the transition of the three molecules is consistent with the direction of       To investigate luminescence behavior in the aggregated state, PL
the long axis of the molecule, which is conducive to promoting the     spectra were measured in DMSO/H2O mixtures with varying water
horizontal orientation of the molecules and improving the luminescence     fractions, as shown in Fig. S6. In pure DMSO (0 % water), TD-2T
efficiency.                                                                exhibited strong fluorescence with an emission peak at 575 nm. As the
                                                                   water content increased from 0 % to 60 %, the fluorescence intensity
2.3. Photophysical properties                                              gradually decreased, accompanied by a redshift in the emission wave­
                                                                             length. This behavior is attributed to the monomeric dispersion of TD-2T
   To investigate the photophysical properties of the three luminescent     in low water-content solutions, where non-radiative transitions domi­
materials, their UV–Vis absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra     nate. As the water content increases, the polarity of the medium rises,

                                                                        4