Inorganic Chemistry                                              pubs.acs.org/IC                                                       Article

surface with real vibrational frequencies. The transition states     membered CAASis  possess  better  ligand  properties  in
were characterized by the presence of only one imaginary     comparison to experimental systems V′, VIII′, and IX′. Such
frequency, which is further verified by performing the intrinsic     enhanced ligand properties render them potential candidates
reaction coordinate (IRC) analysis.34 Solvent effects (benzene)       for small molecule activations. We sought to investigate such
were incorporated using the solvation model based on density       activations by considering H2 and C2H2 as substrates together
(SMD).35 To investigate the ligand properties and bonding      with the dehydrogenation of ammonia borane in our present
situation of the studied molecules, natural bond orbital (NBO)      study. To make the study relevant to the synthetic chemists,
analysis was performed on the optimized geometries.36 To      the energetics of the activations was compared with isolable
check the reliability of the calculated adiabatic ΔES−T values,     and experimentally evaluated systems.
we have recalculated them using two  different functionals                                                              Activation of Dihydrogen and Acetylene
(B3PW9137 and ωB97XD38). Dispersion effects were included
using the D3BJ version of Grimme’s dispersion correction in      Several industrially relevant chemical transformations involve
combination with the original D3 damping function using the      the splitting of enthalpically strong bonds such as H−H, C−H,
keyword  empiricaldispersion = GD3BJ.39  Furthermore,  to       etc.,  which  has  mostly  been  accomplished  employing
check the presence of any internal instability in the proposed      transition-metal (TM) catalysts that are both expensive and
silylenes, we have performed a stability check on the single-       toxic.45,46 On the contrary to TMs, the main-group elements
determinant wave functions of the optimized  singlet  state      are  cost-effective and environmentally  benign, and  hence,
geometries.40,41 The energetics for all of the reactions has been       efforts were made to synthesize main-group-based catalysts as
computed in terms of change in Gibbs free energies at 298 K       alternatives for TMs. In 2005, Power and co-workers for the
and 1 atm pressure using the Gaussian 09 suite of programs.42        first time reported the activation of H2 by using a digermyne
                                                          complex under ambient reaction conditions.47 In a seminal
         AND DISCUSSION                             work, Bertrand and co-workers reported the metal-free single-■RESULTSThe important geometrical and electronic parameters of the       site activation of H2 and NH3 by both acyclic and  cyclic
optimized singlet state geometries of 1−6, as well as those of      carbenes.48 In 2012, Aldridge, Jones, and Mountford reported
the truncated versions of the synthetically attainable silylenes      the facile splitting of dihydrogen by mixed amido boryl acyclic
V, VIII, and IX (V′, VIII′, and IX′, respectively, where the       silylene.49 Later, several other acyclic silylenes were isolated
bulky Dipp and adamantly groups were replaced with a phenyl      that could cleave the H−H bond of dihydrogen.50 In 2008,
group), are presented in Table 1. The computed geometrical       Driess’s group reported C−H insertion and cycloaddition by V
parameters of V′, VIII′, and IX′ are in excellent agreement     (Scheme 1).51 Inspired by these and other reports of metal-
with the observed values, thereby lending credence to the level       free activation of small molecules, we decided to probe the
of theory used for the present study. Replacement of the      potential of the proposed silylenes (Scheme 2) toward such
tetracoordinated quaternary carbon adjacent to the amino     bond activations.
group in 1 by BNMe2 (2), silicon (3), and carbonyl group (4)      The most important and dominant  interaction  for H2
led to an increase in the Si−N bond distance (r2), which may      activation  is that between the σ-symmetric donor orbital of
be attributed to the delocalization of the amino lone pair (NLP)       silicon with the H−H antibonding orbital, i.e., σLP →σ*H−H,
not only to the formally vacant p orbital of the central Si but      thereby elongating and polarizing the H−H bond, as shown in
also to the empty 2p and 3p orbitals at boron (2) and silicon      Figure 2, by considering 1 as the representative silylene. The
(3), respectively, as well as the π*CO orbital (4). Annulation at      electronic and geometrical changes that took place as a result
the position α to the silicon center in 5 and 6 led to a dramatic      of the σLP →σ*H−H interactions are presented in Table S2. In
increase in Si−N bond lengths compared to that in 1.            agreement with  their  larger  singlet−triplet  separation and
  The thermodynamic  stability  of  the  divalent group 14
compounds can be judged from an evaluation of their singlet−
triplet  energy  gaps  (ΔES−T).43  All  the  proposed  system
possesses reasonable ΔES−T values ranging from 27.1 to 41.3
kcal mol−1, with the lowest being computed for annulated
silylene 5 (Figure 1). The presence of an annulated quinine
moiety  leads  to  destabilization  of  the  singlet  state  via
withdrawal of the π-electron density from NLP, thus resulting
in a lower ΔES−T values for 5 and 6.44 The reliability of the
calculated ΔES−T values were checked by recalculating them
using  other  functionals and  obtained  comparable  results
(Table S1). The ligand properties of the proposed silylenes
(Scheme 2) can be understood by studying the nature and
energies of the frontier molecular orbitals. It is evident from
Figure 1  that  the  installation  of  the  carbonyl group  or
annulation led to a substantial increase in the accepting ability
of the silylene center. It is worth mentioning that except for 1,
all of the proposed CAASis show better accepting ability than
experimental systems  V′,  VIII′, and  IX′. The σ-donation
ability of 4, 5, and 6 decreases significantly in comparison to 1,
which may be attributed to the incorporation of the carbonyl      Figure 2. Reaction profile diagram depicting the activation of the
group in 4 and annulation in the ring framework of 5 and 6.      dihydrogen molecule by silylene 1. The reaction free energies and
From the above discussion, it is evident that the proposed six-     bond lengths are given in kcal mol−1 and Å, respectively.

                                                             1669                                               https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.inorgchem.5c05410
                                                                                                                                                                                  Inorg. Chem. 2026, 65, 1666−1676