Journal of the American Chemical Society                             pubs.acs.org/JACS                                      Article

Scheme 6. Small Changes within Highly Sterically Congested Tetracyclic Substrates Have a Drastic Impact on Reaction
Successa





aReagents and conditions: (a) RhCl(PPh3)3 (0.6 equiv), H2 (1 atm), MeOH/toluene (1:1), 23 °C, 64%; (b) p-TsOH·H2O (1.0 equiv), 1,4-
dioxane, 110 °C, 24 h, 50% (12 + unidentified, inseparable rearrangement product).

  As a result, we decided to migrate the trisubstituted double       Finally, after extensive screening of both Lewis and Brønsted
bond into the more thermodynamically stable tetrasubstituted      acids and numerous attempts to use the often employed
olefin  within 50  to  erase  that  stereochemical  error by    ammonium salts for intramolecular aldol condensations,39 all
subjecting           the  material  to 10 mol %  of [Pd(MeCN)4]-      conditions that failed, we found that strongly basic conditions        15d,35
(BF4)2      in MeCN; any attempts to reach 50 directly from      using irreversible base (LiHMDS, THF, −78 °C) followed by
42 failed, likely due to the fact the most precedented examples                                              LiOH exposure could afford the desired tetracyclic enone (i.e.,
usually employ  less  substituted  diene  or  require  metal
                                                                  11).coordination to an inaccessible  s-cis diene conformation.36
                                                To complete the desired key common intermediate  (i.e.,
But, given the success of this two-step protocol, we now had
                                                                  12), just a single carbon atom had to be added. Yet, while theaccess to a material that allowed for further manipulation of
                                                                   goal was simply stated, this objective proved challenging eventhe left-hand half of the structure.
                                                           though the Carreira group had accomplished a similar process We sought next to complete the last ring of the harziane
diterpenoids  via an  intramolecular  condensation  reaction.       in their synthesis of harzianol I (19, cf. Scheme 1), albeit on a
Achieving such an event required the  initial conversion of       less hindered system.8 Indeed, in our hands the use of any
the major trans-diastereomer of the ketone relative to the ester      dialkylcuprate reagent strongly favored 1,2-addition, likely due
within 50  into  its  cis-disposed  alternative. Although DFT      to the high steric encumbrance of the α,β-unsaturated ketone
calculations (see SI for more information) indicated that the      within the newly formed bicyclo[3.2.1]octane of 11; and, when
trans-isomer was  2.32 kcal/mol more  stable than  its  cis-     such  additions  occurred,  they  often  were  followed  by
alternative, the fact that we obtained some cis-disposed 42                                                                   elimination to form a 1,1-disubstituted olefin. Thankfully, si-
following the semi-Pinacol step (where the requisite transition                                                                       face selective 1,4-addition of lithiated 1,3-dithiane as solvated
state should only have delivered the trans-isomer) suggested                                                         by HMPA40 proceeded in quantitative yield, with subsequent
that such an isomerization could, at least to some degree, be
                                                                       desulfurization using Raney Ni completing the synthesis of 12
achieved.
                                                                        in 17 steps overall;40 interestingly, a similar protocol was also  In  practice,  all  efforts which proceeded under reversible
                                                            used by the Gui group in their recently published syntheses.11keto−enol tautomerization conditions afforded only the trans-
                                                         As a final note, although we had originally believed thatisomer. Similarly, efforts to achieve an in situ epimerization
followed by immediate Dieckmann condensation failed, even if      several  of  these  steps  (i.e.,  diene  manipulation,  aldol
the material was heated to 90 °C in a sealed tube. By contrast,      condensation, and conjugate addition  of a methyl group)
though, soft enolization to form the tetrasubstituted silyl enol      could be achieved interchangeably, that did not prove to be the
ether of 50 followed by protonolysis in a second pot using 1      case.  Indeed,  subtle  changes  in  structural  complexity
equiv  of (±)-camphorsulfonic  acid  afforded both  diaster-      unexpectedly prevented previously achievable reactions from
eomers  in  1.1:1  ratio  slightly  favoring  the  trans-disposed      being accomplished. Scheme 6 provides a sampling of those
material.37a Screening of several additional acids and solvent      outcomes. For example, starting from 52, conjugate addition
did not substantively alter that diastereoselectivity. The only                                                              could deliver 54, but subsequent diene hydrogenation did not
superior result was obtained by combining a Lewis acid and                                                                 proceed. Alternatively, the diene within 52 could be reduced to
BINOL,  i.e., asymmetric protonolysis conditions, as inspired
                                                                  53, but further efforts to isomerize the alkene failed. And, whileby Yamamoto;37b that combination afforded a 3:1 mixture
                                                     55 could be obtained from 53, the subsequent isomerization
favoring  the  cis-disposed compound.  Unfortunately,  this
                                                           (which could only be achieved here under acidic conditionsprocedure did not prove to be sufficiently scalable. Thus, to
                                                                  using p-TsOH·H2O) also produced an unexpected rearrange-advance sufficient material, we found that three rounds of
epimerization  using  the  original (±)-camphorsulfonic  acid     ment product which could not be separated from 12 by any
conditions could deliver a 70% yield of the desired cis-disposed      conventional chromatography, including the use of AgNO3-
isomer. Two  further  standard  manipulations (DIBAL-H      impregnated silica gel,41 because of the highly nonpolar nature
reduction and reoxidation)38 then delivered ketoaldehyde 51.      of both materials.

                                                             509                                                            https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c14490
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2026, 148, 504−514